<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>dedication</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="dedication" epub:type="dedication">
			
<h2>Dedication</h2>
<pre>
To S.A.

I loved you, so I drew these tides of men into my hands
   and wrote my will across the sky in stars
To earn you Freedom, the seven-pillared worthy house,
   that your eyes might be shining for me
                                              When we came.

Death seemed my servant on the road, till we were near
   and saw you waiting:
When you smiled, and in sorrowful envy he outran me
   and took you apart:
                                        Into his quietness.

Love, the way-weary, groped to your body, our brief wage
   ours for the moment
Before earth's soft hand explored your shape, and the blind
   worms grew fat upon
                                            Your substance.

Men prayed me that I set our work, the inviolate house,
   as a menory of you.
But for fit monument I shattered it, unfinished: and now
The little things creep out to patch themselves hovels
   in the marred shadow
                                              Of your gift.

</pre>

<p>Mr Geoffrey Dawson persuaded All Souls College to give me
leisure, in 1919-1920, to write about the Arab Revolt. Sir Herbert
Baker let me live and work in his Westminster houses.</p>

<p>The book so written passed in 1921 into proof; where it was
fortunate in the friends who criticized it. Particularly it owes
its thanks to Mr. and Mrs. Bernard Shaw for countless suggestions
of great value and diversity: and for all the present
semicolons.</p>

<p>It does not pretend to be impartial. I was fighting for my hand,
upon my own midden. Please take it as a personal narrative piece
out of memory. I could not make proper notes: indeed it would have
been a breach of my duty to the Arabs if I had picked such flowers
while they fought. My superior officers, Wilson, Joyce, Dawnay,
Newcombe and Davenport could each tell a like tale. The same is
true of Stirling, Young, Lloyd and Maynard: of Buxton and
Winterton: of Ross, Stent and Siddons: of Peake, Homby,
Scott-Higgins and Garland: of Wordie, Bennett and MacIndoe: of
Bassett, Scott, Goslett, Wood and Gray: of Hinde, Spence and
Bright: of Brodie and Pascoe, Gilman and Grisenthwaite, Greenhill,
Dowsett and Wade: of Henderson, Leeson, Makins and Nunan.</p>

<p>And there were many other leaders or lonely fighters to whom
this self-regardant picture is not fair. It is still less fair, of
course, like all war-stories, to the un-named rank and file: who
miss their share of credit, as they must do, until they can write
the despatches.</p>

<p>T. E. S.<br>
Cranwell, 15.8.26</p>


		</section>
	</body>
</html>
